README.md, before:

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/Robert-Cunningham/CodeAbility/blob/master/Images/CodeAbility_Logo.png" height="300"></align>

## Summary
Code-ability is a dictation tool especially for programmers. Most text to speech today is meant specifically to parse English, which makes it very hard to dictate code without saying something like

> If open parenthesis x equals equals 5 close parenthesis open bracket...

Many programmers can't use their hands; from stress related injuries to carpal tunnel to early onset arthritis and even paralysis and nerve damage. Whatever the cause, these programmers have a very hard time typing their programs and have to choose between trying to use an existing dictation software not meant for programmers, or avoiding writing new code altogether.

With Code-ability, the above if statement can be dictated as

> If x equals 5 then

Which will be parsed as

    if(x == 5):
	    # body


## User Guide
If the program parses what you say straight into code, it will insert it into your file. Otherwise, there are specific voice commands that you can use for various operations. The program uses the NATO phonetic alphabet to say single letters, so as not to confuse the speech to text algorithm.

The specific commands are split into the following categories:

 - `Create [item]`: Creates an item such as a for loop, if statement etc
	 - When creating an item, use the word "next" to jump to the next field
- `Jump to [item] / goto [item]`: Goes to an item in the file, such as a line number, word or specific function
- `Back`: A simple backspace
- `Replace [word1] with [word2]`: Replace the next occurance of word1 with word2
- `Define [name] with parameters [param1] and [param2] body`: Create a [name](param1, param2):

### Create keyword

You can create the following items with the **create** keyword. The [] means that you can use **next** to fill in that field
- For loop
	- `for [] in []:`\
			`[]`
- For range loop
	- `for [] in range([]):`\
			`[]`
- While loop
	- `while([]):`\
			`[]`
- If statement
	- `if([]):`\
			`[]`
- Function
	- `def []([]):`\
			`[]`

### Jump to and goto

You can do the following with the **teleport to** and **goto** keywords:
- line #
- next word
- last word / previous word

### Callling functions
- No parameters
	- `call [function name]`
- One parameter
	- `call [function name] with parameter [param]`
- Parameter as return value
	- `call [function name] with result of [function name 2]`
- Multiple parameters
	- `call [function name] with parameters [param1] and [param2] and [param3]`

### Delimiting lists
- If you have a nested list (like a nested function call), each list should be delimited with the same word, with different words for different lists. For example:
	-  > print the result of func with parameters second func 40 comma third func 9 pound 4 and 7
		- `print(func(secondFunc(40,thirdFunc(9,4)),7)`
	- You can use the following words to distinguish between separate lists:
		- comma
		- and
		- pound
		- carat

## Line by Line Examples

- return the result of the factorial of the quantity 5 plus the element at x plus y in myarray → `return factorial(5 + myArray[x + y])`
- The result of x of 1 and two and the result of y of three comma four and five) → `x(1, 2, y(3, 4), 5)`
- Length of an iterable
	- The length of array → `len(array)`
- Compare Expressions
	- X is greater than or equal to Y → `X >= Y`
	- X equals Y → `X == Y`
- Call Functions
	- Call fib with parameters x and y → `fib(x,y)`
	- Return the result of fib of x and y → `fib(x,y)`
- Create Lists
	- List of x and y and z → `[x,y,z]`
	- Empty list → `[]`
- Index and slice into arrays
	- Element 2 of myArray → `myArray[2]`
	- Elements 3+1 through end of myArray → `myArray[4:]`
- Prioritize expressions
	- Fib of x plus y plus z → `fib(x)  + y + z`
	- Fib of quantity x plus y plus z → `fib(x + y) + z`
- Arithmetic
	- x plus y → `x + y`
- Control Statements
	- if x equals y then return x minus y
	- Otherwise if x is less than y then return y minus x
	- Else return y
- Maneuverability
	- Next word: equivalent to vim’s “e”
	- Previous word: equivalent to vim’s “b”
	- Backspace: you guessed it
	- Teleport to symbol: Teleport to symbol
	- Teleport to line: Teleport to line
- Assing variables
	- Set x to y
- Strings
	- Quote hello unquote


## Full Program Examples

> import math\
> define function sum with parameters X-Ray and Yankee\
> return X-Ray plus Yankee\
> back call print with result of sum with parameters math dot pow of 2 comma 3 and 70

    import math
    def sum(x, y):
	    return x + y
	print(sum(math.pow(2,3),70))

> define sort with parameters array and body\
> if the length of array is less than or equal to 1 then\
> return array\
> else\
> set pivot to element 0 of array then\
> set larger to x for x in elements 1 through end of array if x is greater than pivot then\
> set smaller to x for x in elements 1 through end of array if x is less than or equal to pivot then\
> return result of sort of smaller plus list of pivot plus result of sort of larger

    def q_sort(array):
    if len(array) <= 1:
    return array
    else:
    pivot = array[0]
    larger = [ element for element in array[1:] if element > pivot ]
    smaller = [ element for element in array[1:] if element <= pivot ]
    return q_sort(smaller) + [pivot] + q_sort(larger)

> if num is greater than one then\
> create for range\
> india next\
> two comma num next\
> if num modulus india equals 0 then\
> return false\
> break\
> back else\
> return true\
> back back else\
> return false

    if num > 1:
        for i in range(2,num):
            if (num % i) == 0:
            return false
            break
        else:
            return true
    else:
        return false

## Hardware

There are 5 foot pedals, and the default settings map the pedals to PTT, Shift, Down, Up, and Tab. Of course, these settings are configurable in pedalConfig.json.

PTT (Push To Talk):
When pushing PTT, the program begins listening for commands and processes any speech into formatted syntactic text. Letting go of PTT ends speech to text conversion. Holding Shift and then depressing PTT latches PTT, so that the program continues listening without continual depression of the PTT pedal. To disable PTT latch, press the PTT pedal (pressing Shift is not necessary).

Down:
Pushing Down moves the cursor down one line, and pressing Shift with Down inserts a new line below the cursor.

Up:
Pushing Up moves the cursor up one line, and pressing Shift with Up inserts a new line above the cursor.

Tab:
Pushing Tab switches between the 2 most recent tabs, and pressing Shift with Tab allow you to cycle through all open tabs.

Shift:
(Modifier key).

## Images

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/Robert-Cunningham/CodeAbility/blob/master/Images/Cover_image.jpg" height="300"></align>

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/Robert-Cunningham/CodeAbility/blob/master/Images/Project_in_use.jpg" height="300"></align>


<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/Robert-Cunningham/CodeAbility/blob/master/Images/top_pedal_design.png" height="300"></align>

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/Robert-Cunningham/CodeAbility/blob/master/Images/Bottom_pedal_design.png" height="300"></align>

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/Robert-Cunningham/CodeAbility/blob/master/Images/Schematic_Scrn.png" height="300"></align>

Commit message:

Update readme with demo link notes and authors

README.md, after:

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/Robert-Cunningham/CodeAbility/blob/master/Images/CodeAbility_Logo.png" height="300"><br><i>Sanskriti Sharma, Lilia Heinold, Ian Richardson, Chris Zhu and Robert Cunningham<br>Winner of Best Overall and Best Documentation<br>HackUMass VI 2018</i></align>

## Summary
Code-ability is a dictation tool especially for programmers. Most text to speech today is meant specifically to parse English, which makes it very hard to dictate code without saying something like

> If open parenthesis x equals equals 5 close parenthesis open bracket...

Many programmers can't use their hands; from stress related injuries to carpal tunnel to early onset arthritis and even paralysis and nerve damage. Whatever the cause, these programmers have a very hard time typing their programs and have to choose between trying to use an existing dictation software not meant for programmers, or avoiding writing new code altogether.

With Code-ability, the above if statement can be dictated as

> If x equals 5 then

Which will be parsed as

    if(x == 5):
	    # body

Here is a [full demo video](https://youtu.be/aKf8mtaoPjI).

## User Guide
If the program parses what you say straight into code, it will insert it into your file. Otherwise, there are specific voice commands that you can use for various operations. The program uses the NATO phonetic alphabet to say single letters, so as not to confuse the speech to text algorithm.

The specific commands are split into the following categories:

 - `Create [item]`: Creates an item such as a for loop, if statement etc
	 - When creating an item, use the word "next" to jump to the next field
- `Jump to [item] / goto [item]`: Goes to an item in the file, such as a line number, word or specific function
- `Back`: A simple backspace
- `Replace [word1] with [word2]`: Replace the next occurance of word1 with word2
- `Define [name] with parameters [param1] and [param2] body`: Create a [name](param1, param2):

### Create keyword

You can create the following items with the **create** keyword. The [] means that you can use **next** to fill in that field
- For loop
	- `for [] in []:`\
			`[]`
- For range loop
	- `for [] in range([]):`\
			`[]`
- While loop
	- `while([]):`\
			`[]`
- If statement
	- `if([]):`\
			`[]`
- Function
	- `def []([]):`\
			`[]`

### Jump to and goto

You can do the following with the **teleport to** and **goto** keywords:
- line #
- next word
- last word / previous word

### Callling functions
- No parameters
	- `call [function name]`
- One parameter
	- `call [function name] with parameter [param]`
- Parameter as return value
	- `call [function name] with result of [function name 2]`
- Multiple parameters
	- `call [function name] with parameters [param1] and [param2] and [param3]`

### Delimiting lists
- If you have a nested list (like a nested function call), each list should be delimited with the same word, with different words for different lists. For example:
	-  > print the result of func with parameters second func 40 comma third func 9 pound 4 and 7
		- `print(func(secondFunc(40,thirdFunc(9,4)),7)`
	- You can use the following words to distinguish between separate lists:
		- comma
		- and
		- pound
		- carat

## Line by Line Examples

- return the result of the factorial of the quantity 5 plus the element at x plus y in myarray → `return factorial(5 + myArray[x + y])`
- The result of x of 1 and two and the result of y of three comma four and five) → `x(1, 2, y(3, 4), 5)`
- Length of an iterable
	- The length of array → `len(array)`
- Compare Expressions
	- X is greater than or equal to Y → `X >= Y`
	- X equals Y → `X == Y`
- Call Functions
	- Call fib with parameters x and y → `fib(x,y)`
	- Return the result of fib of x and y → `fib(x,y)`
- Create Lists
	- List of x and y and z → `[x,y,z]`
	- Empty list → `[]`
- Index and slice into arrays
	- Element 2 of myArray → `myArray[2]`
	- Elements 3+1 through end of myArray → `myArray[4:]`
- Prioritize expressions
	- Fib of x plus y plus z → `fib(x)  + y + z`
	- Fib of quantity x plus y plus z → `fib(x + y) + z`
- Arithmetic
	- x plus y → `x + y`
- Control Statements
	- if x equals y then return x minus y
	- Otherwise if x is less than y then return y minus x
	- Else return y
- Maneuverability
	- Next word: equivalent to vim’s “e”
	- Previous word: equivalent to vim’s “b”
	- Backspace: you guessed it
	- Teleport to symbol: Teleport to symbol
	- Teleport to line: Teleport to line
- Assing variables
	- Set x to y
- Strings
	- Quote hello unquote


## Full Program Examples

> import math\
> define function sum with parameters X-Ray and Yankee\
> return X-Ray plus Yankee\
> back call print with result of sum with parameters math dot pow of 2 comma 3 and 70

    import math
    def sum(x, y):
	    return x + y
	print(sum(math.pow(2,3),70))

> define sort with parameters array and body\
> if the length of array is less than or equal to 1 then\
> return array\
> else\
> set pivot to element 0 of array then\
> set larger to x for x in elements 1 through end of array if x is greater than pivot then\
> set smaller to x for x in elements 1 through end of array if x is less than or equal to pivot then\
> return result of sort of smaller plus list of pivot plus result of sort of larger

    def q_sort(array):
    if len(array) <= 1:
    return array
    else:
    pivot = array[0]
    larger = [ element for element in array[1:] if element > pivot ]
    smaller = [ element for element in array[1:] if element <= pivot ]
    return q_sort(smaller) + [pivot] + q_sort(larger)

> if num is greater than one then\
> create for range\
> india next\
> two comma num next\
> if num modulus india equals 0 then\
> return false\
> break\
> back else\
> return true\
> back back else\
> return false

    if num > 1:
        for i in range(2,num):
            if (num % i) == 0:
            return false
            break
        else:
            return true
    else:
        return false

## Hardware

There are 5 foot pedals, and the default settings map the pedals to PTT, Shift, Down, Up, and Tab. Of course, these settings are configurable in pedalConfig.json.

PTT (Push To Talk):
When pushing PTT, the program begins listening for commands and processes any speech into formatted syntactic text. Letting go of PTT ends speech to text conversion. Holding Shift and then depressing PTT latches PTT, so that the program continues listening without continual depression of the PTT pedal. To disable PTT latch, press the PTT pedal (pressing Shift is not necessary).

Down:
Pushing Down moves the cursor down one line, and pressing Shift with Down inserts a new line below the cursor.

Up:
Pushing Up moves the cursor up one line, and pressing Shift with Up inserts a new line above the cursor.

Tab:
Pushing Tab switches between the 2 most recent tabs, and pressing Shift with Tab allow you to cycle through all open tabs.

Shift:
(Modifier key).

## Images

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/Robert-Cunningham/CodeAbility/blob/master/Images/Cover_image.jpg" height="300"></align>

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/Robert-Cunningham/CodeAbility/blob/master/Images/Project_in_use.jpg" height="300"></align>


<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/Robert-Cunningham/CodeAbility/blob/master/Images/top_pedal_design.png" height="300"></align>

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/Robert-Cunningham/CodeAbility/blob/master/Images/Bottom_pedal_design.png" height="300"></align>

<p align="center"><img src="https://github.com/Robert-Cunningham/CodeAbility/blob/master/Images/Schematic_Scrn.png" height="300"></align>

### Notes
Although this is a Hackathon project, this isn't the final version. We plan to continue development and testing; which includes code refactoring, adding new features and releasing the project fully with install instructions.
